## Adding a game to `game-data-packager`

### Step 1: the template `.deb` file

#### overview

`game-data-packager` works by injecting user-supplied files into a
template debian package.  The first step towards adding support for
a new game is to prepare the files for the template debian package.

The template packages that are distributed within gdp are built using the
`Makefile` in the root of the source package.  You need to add commands
necessary to build your package to the `default` target, and any clean up
instructions to the `clean` target.

In practice, most supported games delegate the work required for building
and cleaning up the template packages to a second makefile, and call
make from within the master makefile.

The files for the template package are generated and assembled within the
subdirectory `build/`.  The final template package is saved into the
subdirectory `out/`.   These packages are invariably built using `dpkg-deb`
and the `-b` argument.

#### things to include in the template package

Debian policy requires the following to be present within the metadata
section of a binary package

 * the control file
 * a copyright file, in `/usr/share/doc/package/copyright`

Policy dictates the following fields within the control file:

 * `Version` field.  We recommend
   using the version of gdp which generated the template package.
 * `Maintainer`.  We recommend using the same maintainer as for gdp,
   which is the Debian Games Team.
 * `Description`. Both the single line synopsis and the extended
   description that follows.
 * Any required dependencies.  For game data packages, we use
   `Recommends` to recommend a corresponding engine package, where
   appropriate.

We also suggest including the following

 * `md5sums` file, so that the user can check whether a package's installed
   files have been modified if they so desire.
 * a `changelog`.  We suggest copying the gdp `changelog` into the
   template package.
 * a `README.Debian` file, explaining that the package was auto-generated
   by gdp.

Finally, it might be worth considering the following

 * do you need to register any alternatives?  For example, the open source
   `freedoom` package provides a Doom 2 IWAD file, and registers an
   alternative for the name `doom2.wad`.  Therefore, the generated `doom2-wad`
   package does the same.
 * Should the data package register any menus, or carry a `.desktop` file?
   In some cases, it makes sense to do this from the data package, rather
   than from the engine package.
   * you may also wish to provide an icon file, but bear in mind that if
     you distribute the icon file inside gdp's source, it needs to meet
     the DFSG.  gdp could generate the icon file at run-time in some
     cases.

#### simple example

The simplest template package for a supported game is currently 
quake3.  The source files for the quake 3 template package are in the
`quake3-data` directory.  They are:

    quake3-data/copyright.in
    quake3-data/DEBIAN/control

The default target in the quake3 makefile, `quake3.mk`, uses the `m4`
pre-processor tool to substitute in some values to these files.

The `copyright` file from gdp's own source is also copied into the
package build directory. The makefile also generates an `md5sums` file
for the package.

#### complex example

A more complex example is for the suite of doom engine games.  There
are currently four supported doom engine games: Doom, Doom 2 and the
two Final Dooms.  Rather than maintain separate makefiles and template
files, a common makefile (`doom-common.mk`) and common template files
(`doom-common`) are used.   Where the resulting templates differ,
makefile variables are used.  For example, the commands in the master
`Makefile` for Doom and Doom 2 are

        make -f doom-common.mk IWAD=doom  LONG="Doom"   VERSION=$(VERSION)
        make -f doom-common.mk IWAD=doom2 \
                LONG="Doom 2: Hell on Earth" VERSION=$(VERSION)

The exact same sub-makefiles are used in both cases, with different
variables substituted in.

### Step 2: the gdp "supported" file

Once you have a template package file, you then need to write a gdp "supported"
file.  This is a shell script that gdp calls into when the user invokes gdp
with your game as an argument.

#### minimum requirements for a "supported" file

A "supported" file must define the following variables:

 * `LONGNAME`: this is used by gdp when printing a usage message.  It can be
   used to disambiguate or expand upon the short name, which might not be
   enough to explain what it is.

You must define a `go` shell subroutine.  This is the main routine which gdp
will invoke from your code.  This routine is explained in the next section.

#### the `go` subroutine

You must define a `go` shell subroutine.  This is the main routine which gdp
will invoke from your code.  You can rely on the following to have happened
when `go` is called:

 * gdp will have sanity-checked any command-line arguments supplied to
   it and set variables accordingly (more on these later)
 * gdp will have created a temporary working directory and stored its
   name in the `WORKDIR` variable
 * gdp will have been invoked with your supported filename as an argument
 * gdp will have sourced the shared library of routines
   `game-data-package-shared`

Your `go` routine is expected to perform the following work:

 * inspect any remaining command line arguments (passed in the `$@` variable)
   and verify that they are correct
 * write a complete template package into the file `$WORKDIR/out.deb`,
   or into the directory `$OUTDIR`, if `$OUTDIR` is defined, to a filename
   of your choice
   * (this is sub-optimal.  a future patch to gdp should tidy this up)

In order to achieve this work, your `go` routine can call on the functions
defined in `lib/game-data-package-shared`, which will already have been
sourced.  These are documented within the file.  A brief overview:

 * a selection of perl-esque helper routines for argument verification, 
   noisy reporting and quitting: `debug`, `warn`, `die`, 
 * some verify/assertion routines: `verify_md5sum`, `verify_directory`,
   etc.
 * a family of `slipstream` routines, which insert new files into an existing
   `.deb` file 
 * routines for unpacking files (abstracting the exact backend used to do so):
   `gdp_unzip`

Future patches to gdp will add more common routines for handling the
downloading of files from the Internet,  including handling mirror lists,
verification, resuming, etc.

### Step 3: installing the new files into the package

The final step is quite small and easy :-)

Add the files which you need to distribute in the gdp binary package to the
`debian/game-data-packager.install` file.  At a minimum, this will be your
"supported" file, but also most likely a template debian package and possibly
other supporting files.
